Add documentation for kopia repository server controller workflow (#2077)
kanisterio/kanister: docs/tutorials/tutorial_with_repositoryserver.rst

    selector:
      matchLabels:
        app: time-logger
    template:
      metadata:
        labels:
          app: time-logger
      spec:
        containers:
        - name: test-container
          image: ghcr.io/kanisterio/kanister-tools:0.92.0
          command: ["sh", "-c"]
          args: ["while true; do for x in $(seq 1200); do date >> /var/log/time.log; sleep 1; done; truncate /var/log/time.log --size 0; done"]
          volumeMounts:
          - name: data
            mountPath: /var/log
        volumes:
        - name: data
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: time-log-pvc
  EOF

Starting Kopia Repository Server
================================

Since we will be using kopia data mover to copy/restore the backups to the location
storage, we need to start the Kopia repository Server. To know more about kopia
repository server, refer :ref:`architecture <architecture>`

The repository server controller requires Repository Server custom resource to
be created to start the server. To understand more about this custom resource,
see :ref:`architecture`.

.. _creating_kopia_repository:

Creating a Kopia Repository
---------------------------

> The kopia repository needs to be created before we start the repository server.

Author: Here it is `kopia repository` and not `kopia repository server`. We need to create Kopia repository before starting the server

with ``spec.repository.RootPath`` in the repository Server CR combined together
should match the``--prefix`` field of the command used to create repository as
specified in section :ref:`Creating a Kopia Repository <creating_kopia_repository>`

.. code-block:: yaml

  $ cat <<EOF | kubectl create -f -
  apiVersion: cr.kanister.io/v1alpha1
  kind: RepositoryServer
  metadata:
    name: kopia-repo-server
    namespace: kanister
  spec:
    storage:
      secretRef:
        name: s3-location
        namespace: kanister
      credentialSecretRef:
        name: s3-loc-creds
        namespace: kanister
    repository:
      rootPath: /test/repo-controller
      passwordSecretRef:
        name: repository-pass
        namespace: kanister
      username: kansiterAdmin
      hostname: timelog.app
    server:
      adminSecretRef:
        name: repository-server-admin
        namespace: kanister
      tlsSecretRef:
        name: repository-server-tls-cert
        namespace: kanister
      userAccess:
        userAccessSecretRef:
          name: repository-server-user-access
          namespace: kanister
        username: kanisteruser
  EOF

> Once the Repository Server is created, you will see a repository server pod and
> a service exposing the kopia repository server created in ``kanister`` namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating the Repository Server, a repository server pod and
a service will be visible in the ``kanister`` namespace, which exposes the created Kopia repository server. 
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ kubectl get pods,svc -n kanister
   NAME                                              READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
   pod/kanister-kanister-operator-5b7dfbf97b-5j5p5   2/2     Running   0          33m
   pod/repo-server-pod-4tjcw                         1/1     Running   0          2m13s

   NAME                                 TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)     AGE
   service/kanister-kanister-operator   ClusterIP   10.96.197.93    <none>        443/TCP     33m
   service/repo-server-service-rq2pq    ClusterIP   10.96.127.153   <none>        51515/TCP   2m13s

> To see if the server started successfully, you can check the status of
> the server using following command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify the successful start of the server, you can use the following command to check the server's status.
```

      - backupIdentifier
      phases:
      - func: ScaleWorkload
        name: shutdownPod
        args:
          namespace: "{{ .Deployment.Namespace }}"
          name: "{{ .Deployment.Name }}"
          kind: Deployment
          replicas: 0
      - func: RestoreDataUsingKopiaServer
        name: restoreFromS3
        args:
          namespace: "{{ .Deployment.Namespace }}"
          pod: "{{ index .Deployment.Pods 0 }}"
          image: ghcr.io/kanisterio/kanister-tools:0.92.0
          backupIdentifier: "{{ .ArtifactsIn.backupIdentifier.KeyValue.id }}"
          restorePath: /var/log
      - func: ScaleWorkload
        name: bringupPod
        args:
          namespace: "{{ .Deployment.Namespace }}"
          name: "{{ .Deployment.Name }}"
          kind: Deployment
          replicas: 1
  EOF

Once we create a Blueprint, we can see its events by using the following command:

.. code-block:: yaml

  $ kubectl --namespace kanister describe Blueprint time-log-bp
  Events:
    Type     Reason    Age   From                 Message
    ----     ------    ----  ----                 -------
    Normal   Added      4m   Kanister Controller  Added blueprint time-log-bp

> The next CustomResource we'll deploy is an ActionSet. An ActionSet is created
> each time you want to execute any Kanister actions. The ActionSet contains all
> the runtime information the controller needs during execution. It may contain
> multiple actions, each acting on a different Kubernetes object. The ActionSet
> we're about to create in this tutorial specifies the ``time-logger`` Deployment we
> created earlier and selects the ``backup`` action inside our Blueprint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next CustomResource to be deployed is an ActionSet. An ActionSet is created
whenever there is a need to execute Kanister actions. It contains all
the runtime information that is essential for the controller during execution. It can include
multiple actions, each acting on a different Kubernetes object. In this tutorial, the forthcoming ActionSet
specifies the ``time-logger`` Deployment that was previously created and selects the ``backup`` action within our Blueprint.
```

  Events:
  Type    Reason           Age   From                 Message
  ----    ------           ----  ----                 -------
  Normal  Started Action   14s   Kanister Controller  Executing action backup
  Normal  Started Phase    14s   Kanister Controller  Executing phase backupToS3
  Normal  Ended Phase      9s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase backupToS3
  Normal  Update Complete  9s    Kanister Controller  Updated ActionSet 'backup-rlcnp' Status->complete

Lets delete the date from ``timelogger`` app.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ kubectl exec -it time-logger-6d89687cbb-bmdj8 -n default -it sh
   sh-5.1# cd /var/log/
   sh-5.1# ls -lrt
   total 12
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root   12 Jun  5 06:22 test.log
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 7308 Jun  5 06:26 time.log
   sh-5.1# rm -rf test.log
   sh-5.1# ls -lrt
   total 8
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 7482 Jun  5 06:26 time.log

Lets perform restore now, by using ``restore`` action from the ``time-log-bp`` blueprint

.. code-block:: bash

   $ kanctl --namespace kanister create actionset --action restore --from "backup-rlcnp" --repository-server kanister/kopia-repo-server
   actionset restore-backup-rlcnp-g5h65 create

> We can see if the restore is successful by describing the actionset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The success of the restore operation can be assessed by describing the actionset.
```

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kubectl describe actionsets.cr.kanister.io restore-backup-rlcnp-g5h65 -n kanister

  Events:
    Type    Reason           Age   From                 Message
    ----    ------           ----  ----                 -------
    Normal  Started Action   20s   Kanister Controller  Executing action restore
    Normal  Started Phase    20s   Kanister Controller  Executing phase shutdownPod
    Normal  Ended Phase      8s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase shutdownPod
    Normal  Started Phase    8s    Kanister Controller  Executing phase restoreFromS3
    Normal  Ended Phase      4s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase restoreFromS3
    Normal  Started Phase    4s    Kanister Controller  Executing phase bringupPod
    Normal  Ended Phase      3s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase bringupPod
    Normal  Update Complete  2s    Kanister Controller  Updated ActionSet 'restore-backup-rlcnp-g5h65' Status->complete

> Lets check if the data was restored successfully. We should see the ``time.log``
> file that was removed before performing restore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is necessary to verify if the data has been successfully restored. The presence of the ``time.log``
file, which was removed prior to the restore process, should confirm the successful restoration.
```

Using Kopia Repository Server as Data Mover in Blueprint
********************************************************

> This tutorial will demonstrate the use of Kopia to copy/restore backups

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will demonstrate the use of Kopia to copy or restore backups
```

to a Kopia repository. We will be using kanister functions
that use Kopia repository Server as data mover in the blueprint.

> For additional documentation on kanister functions and blueprints
> refer to the :ref:`architecture` and :ref:`kanister functions<functions>`
> sections respectively

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional documentation on kanister functions and blueprints,
refer to the :ref:`architecture` and :ref:`kanister functions<functions>`
sections, respectively.
```

.. contents:: Tutorial Overview
  :local:

Prerequisites
=============

* Kubernetes ``1.16`` or higher. For cluster version lower than ``1.16``,
  we recommend installing Kanister version ``0.62.0`` or lower.

* `kubectl <https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/>`_ installed
  and setup

* `helm <https://helm.sh>`_ installed and initialized using the command `helm init`

* docker

> * Kopia repository server controller should be deployed along with Kanister controller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Kopia repository server controller should be deployed along with the Kanister controller.
```

  Refer
  :ref:`Deploying Kopia Repository server controller <deploying_repo_server_controller>`

* Access to s3 bucket and credentials

Example Application
===================

> This tutorial begins by deploying a sample application. The application is
> contrived, but useful for demonstrating Kanister's features. The application
> appends the current time to a log file every second. The application's container
> includes the aws command-line client which we'll use later in the tutorial. The
> application is installed in the ``default`` namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial begins by deploying a sample application. While this application is
intentionally simplified, it serves the purpose of demonstrating Kanister's features. The application
appends the current time to a log file every second. The application's container
includes the aws command-line client, which we will use in later sections of this tutorial. This
application is installed within the ``default`` namespace.
```

We can use words such as "designed" or "crafted" or "created" instead of the word "contrived".

actions on an application. An action consists of one or more phases. Each phase
invokes a :doc:`Kanister Function </functions>`. Every Kanister function accepts a
string list as input. The ``args`` field in a Blueprint's phase is rendered and passed
into the specified function.

To learn more about Kanister's CustomResources, see :ref:`architecture`.

The Blueprint to be created includes two actions called ``backup``
and ``restore``. The ``backup`` action comprises of a single phase named as
``backupToS3``.

``backupToS3`` invokes the Kanister function ``BackupDataUsingKopiaServer``
that uses Kopia repository server to copy backup data to s3 storage. The action
``restore`` uses two kanister functions ``ScaleWorkload`` and ``RestoreDataUsingKopiaServer``.
``ScaleWorkload`` function scales down the ``timelog`` application before restoring the data.
``RestoreDataUsingKopiaServer`` restores data using Kopia repository server form
s3 storage.

To learn more about the Kanister function, refer to the documentation on
:doc:`Kanister's parameter templating </functions>`.

Output artifacts are used in this scenario to store the data path in s3 and

> the corresponding snapshot ID that which will serve as the ``backupIdentifier``
> during restoration process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the corresponding snapshot ID, which will serve as the ``backupIdentifier``
during the restoration process.
```

whenever there is a need to execute Kanister actions. It contains all
the runtime information that is essential for the controller during execution.
It can include multiple actions, each acting on a different Kubernetes object.
In this tutorial, the forthcoming ActionSet specifies the ``time-logger``
deployment that was previously created and selects the ``backup`` action
within our Blueprint.

Add some data in the time logger app.

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl exec -it time-logger-6d89687cbb-bmdj8 -n default -it sh
   sh-5.1# cd /var/log/
   sh-5.1# ls
   time.log
   sh-5.1# echo "hello world" >> test.log
   sh-5.1# cat test.log
   hello world

ActionSet
---------

.. code-block:: bash

  # Create action set using the blueprint created in above step
  $ kanctl create actionset --action backup --namespace kanister --blueprint time-log-bp --deployment default/time-logger --repository-server kanister/kopia-repo-server
  actionset actionset backup-rlcnp created

The ``--repository-server`` flag is used to provide the reference to the repository server
CR created in step :ref:`Creating Repository Server custom resource <creating_repo_server_CR>`.

> As the CR contains the details related to the Kopia repository server and the associated secrets,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the CR contains details related to the Kopia repository server and the associated secrets,
```

the blueprint can access these details using template parameters. This enables the blueprint to

> execute backup operation using the Kopia repository server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
execute backup operations using the Kopia repository server.
```

    ----     ------    ----  ----                 -------
    Normal   Added      4m   Kanister Controller  Added blueprint time-log-bp

The next CustomResource to be deployed is an ActionSet. An ActionSet is created
whenever there is a need to execute Kanister actions. It contains all
the runtime information that is essential for the controller during execution.
It can include multiple actions, each acting on a different Kubernetes object.
In this tutorial, the forthcoming ActionSet specifies the ``time-logger``
deployment that was previously created and selects the ``backup`` action
within our Blueprint.

Add some data in the time logger app.

.. code-block:: bash

   kubectl exec -it time-logger-6d89687cbb-bmdj8 -n default -it sh
   sh-5.1# cd /var/log/
   sh-5.1# ls
   time.log
   sh-5.1# echo "hello world" >> test.log
   sh-5.1# cat test.log
   hello world

ActionSet
---------

.. code-block:: bash

  # Create action set using the blueprint created in above step
  $ kanctl create actionset --action backup --namespace kanister --blueprint time-log-bp --deployment default/time-logger --repository-server kanister/kopia-repo-server
  actionset actionset backup-rlcnp created

> The ``--repository-server`` flag is used to provide the reference to the repository server
> CR created in step :ref:`Creating Repository Server custom resource <creating_repo_server_CR>`.
> As the CR contains details related to the Kopia repository server and the associated secrets,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``--repository-server`` flag is used to provide a reference to the repository server
CR created in step :ref:`Creating Repository Server custom resource <creating_repo_server_CR>`.
Since the CR contains details related to the Kopia repository server and the associated secrets,
```

the blueprint can access these details using template parameters. This enables the blueprint to
execute backup operations using the Kopia repository server.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kubectl describe actionsets.cr.kanister.io backup-rlcnp -n kanister

  Events:
  Type    Reason           Age   From                 Message
  ----    ------           ----  ----                 -------
  Normal  Started Action   14s   Kanister Controller  Executing action backup
  Normal  Started Phase    14s   Kanister Controller  Executing phase backupToS3
  Normal  Ended Phase      9s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase backupToS3
  Normal  Update Complete  9s    Kanister Controller  Updated ActionSet 'backup-rlcnp' Status->complete

> Lets delete the date from ``timelogger`` app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's delete the date from the ``timelogger`` app.
```

.. code-block:: bash

   $ kubectl exec -it time-logger-6d89687cbb-bmdj8 -n default -it sh
   sh-5.1# cd /var/log/
   sh-5.1# ls -lrt
   total 12
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root   12 Jun  5 06:22 test.log
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 7308 Jun  5 06:26 time.log
   sh-5.1# rm -rf test.log
   sh-5.1# ls -lrt
   total 8
   -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 7482 Jun  5 06:26 time.log

Now, let's proceed with the restore process by using the ``restore`` action from the
``time-log-bp`` blueprint:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ kanctl --namespace kanister create actionset --action restore --from "backup-rlcnp" --repository-server kanister/kopia-repo-server
   actionset restore-backup-rlcnp-g5h65 create

> The success of the restore operation can be assessed by describing the actionset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The success of the restore operation can be assessed based on the following actionset:
```

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kubectl describe actionsets.cr.kanister.io restore-backup-rlcnp-g5h65 -n kanister

  Events:
    Type    Reason           Age   From                 Message
    ----    ------           ----  ----                 -------
    Normal  Started Action   20s   Kanister Controller  Executing action restore
    Normal  Started Phase    20s   Kanister Controller  Executing phase shutdownPod
    Normal  Ended Phase      8s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase shutdownPod
    Normal  Started Phase    8s    Kanister Controller  Executing phase restoreFromS3
    Normal  Ended Phase      4s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase restoreFromS3
    Normal  Started Phase    4s    Kanister Controller  Executing phase bringupPod
    Normal  Ended Phase      3s    Kanister Controller  Completed phase bringupPod
    Normal  Update Complete  2s    Kanister Controller  Updated ActionSet 'restore-backup-rlcnp-g5h65' Status->complete

> It is necessary to verify if the data has been successfully restored. The presence of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is necessary to verify that the data has been restored successfully. The presence of
```

Using Kopia Repository Server as Data Mover in Blueprint
********************************************************

> This tutorial will demonstrate how to use Kopia to copy or restore
> backups in a Kopia repository. We will be using kanister functions
> that use the Kopia repository Server as the data mover in the blueprint.
> For additional documentation on kanister functions and blueprints,
> refer to the :ref:`architecture` and :ref:`kanister functions<functions>`
> sections, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial will demonstrate how to use Kopia to copy or restore
backups in a Kopia repository. We will be using Kanister functions
that use the Kopia repository Server as the data mover in the blueprint.
For additional documentation on Kanister functions and blueprints,
refer to the :ref:`architecture` and :ref:`kanister functions<functions>`
sections, respectively.
```

  apiVersion: v1
  kind: PersistentVolumeClaim
  metadata:
    name: time-log-pvc
    labels:
      app: time-logger
  spec:
    accessModes:
      - ReadWriteOnce
    resources:
      requests:
        storage: 1Gi
  ---
  apiVersion: apps/v1
  kind: Deployment
  metadata:
    name: time-logger
  spec:
    replicas: 1
    selector:
      matchLabels:
        app: time-logger
    template:
      metadata:
        labels:
          app: time-logger
      spec:
        containers:
        - name: test-container
          image: ghcr.io/kanisterio/kanister-tools:0.92.0
          command: ["sh", "-c"]
          args: ["while true; do for x in $(seq 1200); do date >> /var/log/time.log; sleep 1; done; truncate /var/log/time.log --size 0; done"]
          volumeMounts:
          - name: data
            mountPath: /var/log
        volumes:
        - name: data
          persistentVolumeClaim:
            claimName: time-log-pvc
  EOF

Starting Kopia Repository Server
================================

To copy or restore backups to the location storage using the Kopia data mover,
it is necessary to start the Kopia repository server. To learn more about the

> Kopia repository server, refer to :ref:`architecture <architecture>` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kopia repository server, refer to the :ref:`architecture <architecture>` section.
```

The repository server controller requires the creation of a Repository Server
custom resource to start the server. To understand more about this custom resource,
see :ref:`architecture`.

.. _creating_kopia_repository:

Creating a Kopia Repository
---------------------------

The Kopia repository must be created before starting the repository server.

You can create it as shown below:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kopia --log-level=error --config-file=/tmp/kopia-repository.config
    --log-dir=/tmp/kopia-cache repository create --no-check-for-updates
    --cache-directory=/tmp/cache.dir --content-cache-size-mb=0 --metadata-cache-size-mb=500
    --override-hostname=timelog.app --override-username=kanisterAdmin s3
    --bucket=test-bucket
    --prefix=/test/repo-controller
    --region=us-east-1
    --access-key=<ACCESS_KEY>
    --secret-access-key=<SECRET_ACCESS_KEY>

> To learn more about how to create repository and gain further insight into the Kopia

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about how to create a repository and gain further insight into the Kopia
```

     # optional: used as a sub path in the bucket for all backups
     path: <base-64-encoded-value>
     # optional: specified in case of S3-compatible stores
     endpoint: <base-64-encoded-value>
     # required, if supported by the provider
     region: <base-64-encoded-value>
  EOF

- ``Creating Storage Location Credentials Secret``

.. code-block:: yaml

  $ cat <<EOF | kubectl create -f -
  apiVersion: v1
  kind: Secret
  metadata:
     name: s3-loc-creds
     namespace: kanister
  type: secrets.kanister.io/aws
  data:
     # required: base64 encoded value for key with proper permissions for the bucket
     access-key: <redacted>
     # required: base64 encoded value for the secret corresponding to the key above
     secret-acccess-key: <redacted>
  EOF

.. _creating_repo_server_CR:

Creating Repository Server Custom Resource
------------------------------------------

After creating the secrets, it is necessary to generate a repository server CR that
references the previously created secrets. For more detailed information about the
repository server CR, refer to the :ref:`architecture` section.

It is important to ensure consistency by using the same values for the fields

> ``spec.repository.username`` and ``spec.repository.hostname`` in the CR(Custom Resource)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``spec.repository.username`` and ``spec.repository.hostname`` in the CR (Custom Resource)
```

     creationTimestamp: "2023-06-05T05:45:49Z"
     generation: 1
     name: kopia-repo-server
     namespace: kanister
     resourceVersion: "41529"
     uid: b4458c4f-b2d5-4dcd-99de-a0a4d32ed216
   spec:
     repository:
       hostname: timelog.app
       passwordSecretRef:
         name: repository-pass
         namespace: kanister
       rootPath: /test/repo-controller
       username: kansiterAdmin
     server:
       adminSecretRef:
         name: repository-server-admin
         namespace: kanister
       tlsSecretRef:
         name: repository-server-tls-cert
         namespace: kanister
       userAccess:
         userAccessSecretRef:
           name: repository-server-user-access
           namespace: kanister
         username: kanisteruser
     storage:
       credentialSecretRef:
         name: s3-loc-creds
         namespace: kanister
       secretRef:
         name: s3-location
         namespace: kanister
   status:
     progress: Ready
     serverInfo:
       podName: repo-server-pod-4tjcw
       serviceName: repo-server-service-rq2pq

> ``pod/repo-server-pod-4tjcw`` and ``service/repo-server-service-rq2pq`` populated in
> ``status.serverInfo`` field  should be used by the client to connect to the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``pod/repo-server-pod-4tjcw`` and ``service/repo-server-service-rq2pq`` populated in
the ``status.serverInfo`` field should be used by the client to connect to the server.
```
